---
layout: post
title: Flight Software Made Simple(r) with NASA's "core Flight System"
date: 2016-12-13 15:00:00 -0400
---

When I'm not working on ground systems or web applications projects for NASA Goddard or doing schoolwork, I'm working on the flight software for my university's upcoming satellite mission, CACTUS-1. We're launching two experiments in a single chassis with a common power bus and communication rig.

One of the two experiments going up on CACTUS-1 is TRAPSat, an experiment designed to catch orbital/high-altitude debris and photograph it so we can see what we've caught. Then, once the orbit decays, the satellite burns up, removing that debris from orbit.

Smaller-scope TRAPSat missions have been flown before - an experimental TRAPSat payload flew on the August 2016 launch of RockSat-X, and a variant designed to be flown with weather balloons instead of propulsive launch systems has flown many times. As a result, re-engineering TRAPSat to ride in the CACTUS-1 chassis is just that - re-engineering. The code already exists in a few different forms, we just have to clean it up and tweak it for the different hardware we're using.

Something that has made this incredibly easy is NASA's [core Flight System (cFS)](https://cfs.gsfc.nasa.gov/), which was the framework used for TRAPSat's flight on RockSat-X. cFS sits on top of [NASA's Operating System Abstraction Layer (OSAL)](http://opensource.gsfc.nasa.gov/projects/osal/) and provides OS-agnostic task scheduling, cross-application messaging, and many other features in one well-documented package. Regardless of the fact that we, unlike most satellite missions, are using a Raspberry Pi running Linux as our main flight computer, cFS gives us all the same tools as someone designing flight software for NASA using a more specialized controller would have.

cFS provides a build chain as well, which includes Platform Support Packages (PSPs) for a number of targets, including Linux, RTEMS, and VxWorks on a few specialty micro-PCs. It's all contained in documented Make and CMake files, so tweaking to your specific build needs is very easy. For instance, I implemented cross-compilation to ARM as a build target in [our fork](https://github.com/cactus-mission/cFE) so we could use x86 continuous integration infrastructure to automatically build for our Pi.

cFS is a fantastic tool, and while (in my opinion) it's way overkill for a small CubeSat mission, it provides us with a framework to grow into. If the mission becomes more advanced in future iterations of CACTUS, we can re-use our same code even if we completely switch CPU architectures and operating systems.

If you're interested in flight software, you can take a look at [cFE](http://opensource.gsfc.nasa.gov/projects/cfe/index.php) (the main component of cFS) and [OSAL](http://opensource.gsfc.nasa.gov/projects/osal/index.php) at the NASA open source portal.